>> You have to see this.
Did you see this?
This is so cool.
>> It was just a
pulsating thing.
>> Wispy flower effect.
>> I was just thrilled.
>> It was like the Pac-Man
coming and taking these little
bites.
>> This is not a normal thing.
This is not something
you see every day.
>> Something very strange,
very unusual, is happening.
>> The animals were freaking out
because they didn't know what
was happening.
>> Even though we all knew
exactly what was going
to happen, to see it in real
life was just unbelievable.
>> There is nothing
like a total eclipse.
>> It is the most mind-boggling
thing you're ever going to see
in nature.
>> There are not many things
that a person sees in his
lifetime that are as singular
as a total solar eclipse.
>> Incredible sense of awe.
>> And all these people
started arriving and setting up
telescopes, every kind of
scientific gadget you could
imagine.
And I thought, well,
this is interesting.
>> The Earth is really fortunate
to be able to see an eclipse.
There is not the
geometry for a person
to witness a total solar
eclipse on any other planet
in the solar system.
Earth's moon is-- even though
400 times smaller than the sun,
it's 400 times closer.
And so that geometry
allows us to witness
a total solar eclipse.
>> And you get to really feel
this ethereal effect of having
the sun go dark in
the middle of the day.
>> A solar eclipse only
happens at new moon phase.
And it's when the new
moon goes directly
in front of the disc of the
sun and casts its shadow
onto the surface of the Earth,
and effectively blocks out
the sunlight for a
short period of time.
>> The new moon is when
the side facing the earth,
the near side, is not
illuminated by the sun.
The only part of the
moon that's illuminated
by the sun at new moon is
the far side of the moon.
But there's a new moon
every single month,
so why don't we see an
eclipse every month?
>> And that's because the
orbit of the moon is tilted
or inclined compared to the
Earth's orbit around the sun.
>> So sometimes the moon passes
above the sun in the sky,
sometimes it passes
below the sun in the sky.
So if the new moon is below the
sun, we won't get an eclipse.
>> Only when the orbit of the
moon lines up with the orbit
of the Earth in
the new moon phase,
that we're able to get to
have a total solar eclipse.
>> We actually get a total
eclipse about once every one
to two years, but they're
only visible from a very small
fraction of the Earth's surface.
>> Now it's not always
a total solar eclipse,
because sometimes the moon is
a little bit farther away from
the Earth, and so you'll
get what's called an annular
eclipse, which is when we
have a ring around the edge
of the moon.
>> Some of the sun still
peeks its way around the moon.
And that is because our orbits
are not perfectly circular.
We are actually
elliptical orbits,
so the Earth is a
little off-center.
That means there are times
when the moon is a bit closer
to the Earth, and there
are times when the moon is
a bit farther from the Earth.
This changes how big
the moon appears to us.
And when the moon's a
little too far away,
it appears a little too small.
And so it does not block
the entire face of the sun.
>> And so you'll have a ring
around it or an annulus.
And sometimes that's referred
to as a ring of fire.
>> But the interesting thing
is that our moon is very slowly
drifting away from the Earth
at about a rate of one inch per
year.
So that means, if
human beings are still
living on this planet hundreds
of thousands of years from now,
they won't get to see
a total solar eclipse.
They will only get to
see an annular eclipse.
>> So because of this changing
in distance with the moon,
up until this point human
history has been pretty lucky.
The moon has appeared as big
as or bigger than the sun
and allowed a total
blocking of that sunlight.
So it's a very
magical time for us.
We need to keep observing these
total eclipses as long as we
can, recording the
data and the images
that we get from them
really for posterity, so
that the future can
see what we used
to observe here in the past.
>> There were things about
the solar eclipse that really
surprised me.
>> About 15 to 20
minutes before totality,
the light became unlike
anything I'd ever seen before.
>> As the sun becomes more
obscured and the light is more
of a narrow focused light, the
shadows all around you will
become much more
defined, much more crisp.
>> The light streaming through
the leaves on a tree will
produce crescent images of
the sun on the ground below
the tree during all the
partial phases of the eclipse,
hundreds of them, as light
goes through those really small
spaces.
>> I took a picture of the
ground underneath a tree.
The spaces between the leaves
were acting like little pinhole
cameras, and there
were just a number
of those images on the ground.
>> So something that's fun to
do also is to look for something
that will block the light and
still allow points of light
to go through it.
>> Anything with small
holes in it will work.
>> Colanders will create
beautiful patterns.
>> A strainer-type spoon
with circular holes.
>> A button, a Ritz
cracker, straw hats,
anything that will allow some
light to come through but still
cast a shadow, will be a fun
way to watch the progress
of the eclipse.
>> Even before totality, you'll
notice that there is a change
in temperature.
>> I felt the
temperature change.
>> You can expect the
temperature to drop anywhere
from 10 to 15 degrees
when it is in totality.
The animals notice that
the light is decreasing
and many of them will
change their behavior.
Chickens may decide
to go back to roost.
Cows may bed down.
Crickets may start chirping.
Birds oftentimes stop singing,
unless it's a night bird.
So an owl might start hooting.
So if you have
animals around you,
pay attention to
what they're doing.
>> Those are all kinds of
phenomena to watch for that
aren't actually part of the
eclipse but kind of an effect
of the eclipse.
>> One minute.
>> Shadow bands are caused by
the focused light from our sun
coming through our atmosphere.
And our atmosphere
is like a fluid,
and so it is
refracting the light.
And so that's why they appear
like ripples on the ground.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Our atmosphere acts like
a fluid just like the water
in a swimming pool.
If you've ever stood next
to an outdoor swimming pool
during the daytime,
you'll notice
that at the bottom
of the pool you
can see shadows and
bright bands moving
as the surface of
the water moves.
The same thing happens
with our atmosphere.
Our atmosphere is
constantly moving,
so there's areas where the
air is a little more dense,
some places where it's
a little less dense.
And so we see
brightness, and we also
see those contrasting shadows.
>> It's very similar to
the effect when you look up
to a very bright star and our
atmosphere causes the star
to twinkle.
>> And we also get to see
some interesting nuances like
the Baily's beads, which occur
because the lunar surface is
not perfectly smooth.
The moon has
mountains and valleys,
and when the solar light tries
to bend its way past the moon,
naturally some of the
mountains will block that light
and some light will make its
way through between the valleys.
>> Baily's beads is a phenomenon
discovered by Francis Baily
in the 1800s, where he was
observing a solar eclipse
and he noticed the last sunlight
right before totality is
streaming between the mountain
peaks on the edge of the moon.
And to him they looked like
a string of bright beads,
and the name stuck.
So when we see that,
we're seeing the last rays
of sunlight pouring between
the mountain peaks and valleys
on the surface of the moon.
And they're only
visible right before
and right after totality,
and they're only
visible for a few seconds.
And we see that last
little bit of light
just as we would see a
sunset between mountain peaks
here on Earth.
>> Oh, my God.
That's Baily's beads.
That's what they're
talking about.
And then the diamond
was gorgeous.
It just exploded.
>> Whoa.
Beautiful.
>> And when there is only
one bead of light left,
that's called the diamond ring.
>> Something called the
diamond ring effect occurs.
This is an interesting
side effect
of the behavior of light,
the fact that light
behaves as a wave as
well as a particle
and can therefore
bend around objects.
In that moment, the
light of the photossphere
tries to bend its
way around the moon
and gets concentrated
in a small area.
Whenever we concentrate
light, we call that a laser.
And so very truly, the
diamond ring effect
is a natural-born laser.
>> Now about the
time that disappears,
you might have the opportunity
to see the chromosphere.
It appears pink or
magenta in color,
which is the next layer
of the sun's atmosphere.
>> The chromosphere is the
colored layer right above
the surface of the sun.
It appears kind of pink.
It's a layer of the sun
that we don't normally
see except during a
total solar eclipse.
>> And in that part
of the atmosphere,
you will also be able to see,
if you're lucky, a prominence.
>> Or solar flares, gaseous
material that's erupted off
the surface of the sun.
You can normally see
this with a special kind
of solar telescope, but
during a total solar eclipse,
you can actually see
them with the naked eye.
>> The thing that made
it stunning, really,
were the prominences.
I had heard that the
corona was beautiful,
but the prominences
were just so--
the color in them was
just so otherworldly.
It was such a vivid
pink color, and I'm not
used to seeing those
colors in everyday life.
I'm not used to
seeing them in nature.
>> We get to see the colors
of light that those atoms emit
or glow.
They're mostly
hydrogen and helium.
They tend to glow a lot
in the pink and the red.
And this gives the chromosphere
a pinkish color to it,
and this is why it's
called the chromosphere.
>> Once the diamond
ring effect passes,
that's when totality kicks in.
And totality is pretty
memorable for multiple reasons.
We get to see the corona, the
outermost layer of the sun.
>> When the sun actually
disappears and you see
the corona, which is something
you just can't see any other
way or any other
time, it's magic.
It's like, I can't believe it's
been up there all that time
and I've just never
seen it before.
>> The corona was amazing.
It was this wispy
blue surrounding
this dark hole in the sky.
>> Now the corona has a lot
of characteristics to it.
And those characteristics are
very important to witness.
Sometimes there
are spikes, loops.
>> What we see going on in the
corona is very much dependent
on the magnetic
field of the sun.
The magnetic field of the sun
is a very active, very dynamic
place.
It's putting out gas and
charged particles and things
like got it into space.
And that changes what
that outer atmosphere,
that corona of the sun will
look like, its shape, how far
out from the moon it goes.
So what we see may be different
for every single eclipse.
If you've seen six
eclipses, you may
see the corona looks
six different ways.
You might get to see some
sunspots during the eclipse,
right before totality, because
there's a sunspot currently
on the sun.
Sunspots are
triggered by changes
in the sun's magnetic field,
and so they appear as dark spots
because the surface
of the sunspot
is actually a little bit cooler
than the surrounding surface
of the sun, so it appears dark.
>> Sunspots are one of the
most famous things that we talk
about with the sun,
discovered by Galileo.
What he noticed was that there
were black spots on the sun.
Of course, at the time, Galileo
didn't know what they were
or why they occurred, but he
did notice that they were there
and that they moved, indicating
that the sun spun on its axis.
The magnetic field
gets stretched
and it stores all
of this energy,
and it can only store so much.
So at first you see the
storing building up.
That impedes the
heat coming through
and that makes a
sunspot, this dark patch
on the sun that indicates
energy has been building.
And as that energy
builds, eventually that
gets released in something a bit
more dramatic and really much
more pretty.
Small-scale would be
a prominence, where
the material is ejected
from that energy
but it comes back to the sun.
It looks like a beautiful
horseshoe-shaped filament
of gas.
A little more energy--
that prominence breaks,
and all of that material gets
released into the solar system.
We call that the solar wind.
It interacts with
our satellites,
gives us things like the
northern and southern lights.
So sunspots are a really lovely
way of finding and following
the magnetic cycle of the sun.
>> There was a red
rim around the Earth.
And I didn't know what that
was, but it was very cool.
>> If you take a moment and
look 360 degrees around you,
you will notice that
all the way around,
the horizon looks
like it's a sunset.
And that's called horizon glow.
>> This beautiful rose color.
It was as though the sun was
coming up in every direction
that you could look.
>> I saw that it was a
360-degree twilight as well.
>> One minute.
And there comes the shadow.
All right.
I'm going to shut off the
motor and watch it happen.
Oh, yeah.
Look at that.
Street lights are
on in the next city.
Shadow just came over me.
Wow.
Oh, this is amazing.
That is so cool.
>> And it became very eerie.
I didn't anticipate that at all.
>> What struck me was the eerie
colors that you don't usually
see on a normal day.
>> And it wasn't like nighttime.
It was a different--
kind of like a veil had
been pulled over my eyes.
>> But it was different.
It was kind of a ghostly color.
There was a definite
change in the sound
that insects were making.
You distinctly heard the
sounds of the evening come on
as totality hit.
>> Our role here at the Casper
Planetarium has always been
to educate the public.
The planetarium dome is a unique
venue to learn about the stars.
The only place better
to learn about the stars
themselves is outside.
Nothing captures the imagination
like going into that theater,
watching the lights go
down, and seeing the night
sky appear before them.
>> We'd like to thank
everybody for coming.
How many folks are
visiting from out of town?
>> There are so many people that
come here that are just amazed
at what they're able to learn.
Even now, during the
eclipse, so many people
have said that there was
so much more to an eclipse
than they even imagined before.
>> One of the more important
eclipses was the eclipse
of 1919.
>> The eclipse of 1919 was
the first opportunity to test
Einstein's theory of relativity.
The mass of the sun
would warp the space,
causing the star to look like
it's in a different position
when viewed close to the
sun during a solar eclipse.
>> Which affirmed Einstein's
theory of relativity.
>> With our digital planetarium,
I can show them in the night
sky as seen from here on Earth.
We can jump off the earth and we
can fly clear out of our galaxy
and look back where our
Earth is in our galaxy.
And that's an
experience no human
being has ever had in real
life, but it's an experience
they can have here.
And it gets them imagining what
a wondrous universe we live in.
>> Not everybody
can be an astronaut.
But any of us can
take a telescope out
and look up at the planet
Saturn in the night sky.
And by doing that, we almost
become a space traveler.
And when we look at really far
distant objects in the night
sky, we're not only
a space traveler,
we're also a time traveler,
because we're looking back
in time, seeing the light as
it was hundreds or thousands
of years ago when
it left that object
and took all that time
to get here to the Earth.
Earth is kind of a big spaceship
traveling through space,
the Earth and the moon our
own personal spaceship moving
through the solar system.
And our solar system is
moving through our galaxy.
So in a way, we are
kind of space travelers.
>> We're just very excited for
people to be able to experience
an eclipse.
But one of our things
that we've been working
on is educating people not
only of what to look for
but how to safely
view the eclipse.
>> And we very strongly caution
people to not directly look
at the sun without some
sort of protection.
And buying solar eclipse
glasses filters out about 99%
of the sunlight.
That will allow you to observe
without any harm to your eye.
You can old-school
like Galileo did it.
>> Take a piece of cardboard,
poke a small pinhole or a nail
hole in it, stand with
your back to the sun,
and then project a virtual
image of the sun onto a piece
of paper or a
piece of cardboard.
>> The diamond ring effect that
occurs right before the moment
of totality, when the sunlight
gets hyperfocused into this
laser beam, can
blind the observer.
>> It's surprising that people
think that they can look
at the sun through multiple
layers of sunglasses,
or that they can look at the
sun when it's a cloudy day.
The back of our eyes do not
have any pain receptors.
And so people that look
at the sun directly
are damaging the back of their
eyes, which is not necessarily
noticeable at the time.
But over days, they will notice
that some of their vision
is lost.
Or you could go
completely blind.
>> One of our favorite ways
when we're working with a group
of people is to have
the sun spotter out.
And that allows the sun to be
projected onto a piece of paper
in about a three-inch
diameter circle.
And that's a safe way to watch
the progress of the eclipse
and do it with a whole group
of people being able to watch.
>> The people of Wyoming are
the nicest people I've ever met.
>> It's an opportunity for
friendship and fellowship.
>> It was as though everyone
around us was your best friend.
>> We're excited.
It was like Christmas Eve last
night, when you were a kid.
>> Yeah.
>> There was such a sense
of camaraderie and everyone
working together and
supporting each other.
>> It's something we do
together as human beings.
>> It had this rock
concert aspect to it.
There was a group component to
it where everyone was, I think,
on some level connected
to everyone else.
>> I loved the sound of people
cheering and gasping around me.
>> Oh, my God,
it's unbelievable.
>> I mean, look at the sun.
It's unbelievable.
>> And to do it
surrounded by my friends--
that made it even better.
>> I went all the way to
Wyoming to see this eclipse.
>> The great American eclipse.
As this was called.
Was followed by the great
American traffic jam.
The drive from Casper to Denver
normally would take four hours.
It took us 10.
>> The worst traffic
jam in Wyoming history.
And it was all worth it.
Not a doubt that I
wouldn't do it again.
>> It was a mystical
thing that had happened.
And it made me wonder what
it was like thousands, if not
millions of years ago when early
humans saw the first eclipse
and wondered what was going on.
>> Throughout time, various
cultures have recorded what
they thought was causing
a total solar eclipse.
>> A lot of the myths about
eclipses from ancient cultures
involved something
eating the sun.
To the Chinese, it was
a dragon eating the sun.
To the Hindus of
India, it was a demon
that had swallowed the sun.
The Mayans in Central America
saw a serpent eating the sun.
>> The Vikings thought it was
a wolf that was eating the sun.
The indigenous
people of the north
tell stories of a
bear eating the sun.
>> We know that an eclipse
is nothing more than the moon
passing in front of the
sun and casting a shadow.
Cultures thousands of
years ago were afraid.
They were afraid of this event.
>> If I was some indigenous
person living in the land
and suddenly this
started to happen,
I would have been
totally freaked out.
Instead, because I
knew it was happening,
I was in reverence of it all.
>> If you understand
how things work,
then you're no longer
afraid of them.
>> There have been some great
examples when one particular
culture or person's
understanding of science
or nature around them has given
them an advantage over others.
As an ancient example
with the Mayans,
the Mayan priests were
early astronomers.
And so they studied the night
sky, the constellations,
the cycles of the
moon and the sun,
and they were very well
and very accurately
able to predict when solar
eclipses would occur.
They were able to build
this into their culture
as a way to represent the
success of particular rituals
or beckonings to their gods,
in particular, Quetzalcoatl,
who was their main god.
And so what the priests would
do, unbeknownst to everybody
else, is pick a
totally eclipse day
as one of these
days for the ritual,
knowing that if they
set it up right,
they could build to the moment
of eclipse and use the eclipse
itself as a sign from the gods.
And then they would usually
say, if the gods have heard us,
they will bring back the sun.
If the gods will
cure our disease,
they will bring back the sun.
Meanwhile the priests
knew the whole time
that the sun was
going to disappear
and it was going to
reappear two minutes later.
They might not have fully
understood the science
behind why these
things occurred,
but they surely knew
that they occurred,
they knew that they
were going to occur,
and they timed a lot
of the cultural rituals
around these moments.
And that allowed
the priests to use
that moment and that
knowledge to give them
an advantage over
everybody else.
>> All too often science
is discounted by the public
at large.
Our very civilization stands
on the shoulders of science.
The fact that we could feed
nearly eight billion people.
The fact that we can
have communications
around the world.
The fact that we don't die
at 20 and 30 years old.
And a whole host of other
benefits come from science.
Science is at the heart
of our civilization.
And for once, all of America
got to see science was good.
>> So much of what we take
for granted in modern life is
a result of basic science
and applied science
and engineering.
And to turn a blind eye to
that is a recipe for disaster,
I think.
Science literacy is very
important for a society.
>> And if we can be
scientifically literate,
we can make better decisions
for not only our ourselves,
but also for the
world we live in.
>> So we need to not only impart
skills to the next generation
that will help them understand
the science as we know it
today, but that will also
give them the tools to develop
and understand the
science of the future.
Technology changes
so quickly that we
need to be able to
keep up with that
and hopefully be the leaders
of that changing technology.
>> If we can get away
from fossil fuel,
if we can reduce the amount
of carbon dioxide we put
into our atmosphere, then we can
turn around the trend of global
warming and man-made
climate change.
>> At some point, we have
to realize that we are all
co-Earthlings and that climate
change is an Earthling issue.
And that's going to require
Earthling solutions,
particularly when
we are treading
into truly unknown territory.
As climate change
gets more rampant,
we're going to see crises
that we've never seen before.
>> Science education
is so important.
Our next generation needs
to know how things work
and how to take
care of our planet
and how to make good
decisions based on science.
And that way they
won't be led astray
by a lot of misconceptions.
>> Being scientifically literate
means you're not going to fall
for just anything anybody says.
>> It is very important as
a scientist that I draw all
of my conclusions from something
that I directly observe
in nature.
This is a critical difference
between philosophy and physics.
Philosophy allows for a
personal opinion or bias
to be part of your answer.
And that is something that
science simply cannot allow.
Bias and personal
opinion can push you
in the wrong
direction, or worse,
force you to force your data
to support the theory you want
instead of allowing the data
to guide you towards the more
correct theory.
>> Science is all
about a process.
It starts when you
observe a phenomenon
that you don't understand.
And observing something
you don't understand always
leads you to ask questions.
When we learn about stars,
we start wondering, well,
do those stars
have other planets?
And then we start looking
for those planets.
And then when we
discover those planets,
we ask, well, do any of
those planets have water?
Oh, well, if they have
water, do they have life?
And then that ultimately
leads to further questions
and further observations
and further questions
and further testing.
So science is all
about a process that
starts with observing
and asking questions
and then goes on to
trying things out.
>> Asking a question, looking
around you to support whether
that question is valid or
invalid, gathering data,
analyzing that data.
We therefore hand
off all of that work
to a peer, someone
in our field who
knows as much or more than
we do, who can read it
and double-check that
the analysis of our data
was valid and
therefore validates
whether our conclusions
are appropriate or not.
The major differentiating
factor is peer review.
Don't just believe me.
I'm not the snake oil
salesman where you should just
take my word for it.
And that scientific
method, that peer review,
is what holds our
feet to the fire.
>> Well, because it gives
us a truer grasp of reality,
I think.
And that's really
important nowadays.
>> When I work with students,
one of the most important
things that I feel is that
they make observations.
You need to be aware
of what's going on
around you, because if
you observe, then maybe
you will wonder.
And then if you have wonder,
you'll ask questions,
and those will lead you
to research and to really
do good science.
>> I think if anything were
to inspire a person about
the scientific realm, I
think this would do it.
>> Knowing why it works
and how it works enhances
the experience.
It's amazing that
for years they've
said totality would begin
at 1:28 and certain seconds
in Nashville.
And sure enough, at 1:28,
the moon blocked the sun.
It was like clockwork.
You have to marvel at
something like that,
but it's science that does that.
>> Eclipses these days are
predicted using sophisticated
computer programs that work
out all the geometry between
the positions of
the sun, the moon,
and the Earth with
respect to each other.
It's a lot of
geometry, trigonometry
to do the calculations.
But it can be done in a split
second now with computers.
>> The neat thing about
science is it doesn't destroy
the mystery of the universe.
If anything it helps you
appreciate that mystery more.
>> I think our understanding
of the science,
our understanding
of how it works--
I think it enhances it.
>> By looking at a distant
nebula that's forming a star,
because I know what it's made
of doesn't diminish its wonder
and its beauty
for me in any way.
In fact, it enhances it.
>> It is so important that you
have the opportunity to witness
it yourself, because
as you observe this,
then you begin to wonder.
And as you wonder, then
maybe you have questions.
And questions can lead
you to investigations.
And this is what
science is all about.
>> Observing a total solar
eclipse for yourself is really
about personal discovery.
It's about experiencing
something for yourself.
>> There's so much that we
don't know even about our sun.
And that's one of the
reasons why it's so important
to study solar eclipses.
>> I couldn't believe how
excited I got seeing it.
>> But there's
something awe-inspiring.
I mean, people say
awesome too much.
But it's really awesome.
>> It was just more epic.
You know, I was
prepared for epic.
But it was just more.
>> It was a visceral experience.
>> A wonderful,
wonderful experience.